Afghanistan’s economy is fragile, relies heavily on external support, and its private sector is weak. The economy shrank by 25 percent in the last two years. The interim Taliban administration’s restrictive policies on women’s education and work will further lower Afghanistan’s recovery prospects. Despite conflict ceasing, one in two Afghans remains poor. Since the crash of 2021, households have reported improvement in their capacity to meet basic needs, but deprivation and vulnerability remain high. But these gains have come at the cost of possibly exhausting all coping strategies and household resources. Afghan households have mobilized extra labor to make ends meet, mainly among youth and women. According to the Afghanistan Welfare Monitoring Survey, round 3, the overall increase in labor supply has outpaced demand, doubling unemployment. Female labor force participation saw a threefold increase compared to 2020, with women primarily engaged in home (garment and food processing).

While improved security has increased primary school attendance and narrowed gender and rural-urban gaps, millions of primary-school-age girls and boys remain out of school mainly due to a lack of access. Since the ban on female secondary school attendance was imposed, only 3% of girls attend secondary school. Among boys aged 13-18, only 44% are receiving a secondary education.

The ITA collected $2.2 billion in revenue in FY 2022, like in 2019, with most receipts from border taxes. Exports hit a record high of $1.9 billion in 2022 but have slowed since early 2023. The Afghani appreciated despite a trade deficit, undermining the recovery prospects for domestic manufacturing and trade sector. The informal Hawala system processes most transactions due to the limited formal financial sector.

Since April 2023, the country has experienced deflation, likely due to improved supply, appreciating AFN, and the economy still adjusting to structurally lower aggregate demand. Following the August 2021 political upheaval, inflation surged due to supply disruptions and shocks in commodity prices, even amid reduced domestic demand. After peaking at 18.3 percent year-on-year in July 2022, inflation plummeted into deflation by April 2023.

Many businesses are struggling to operate at full capacity. In the Private Sector Rapid Survey's third round in March-April 2023, just over half of the firms surveyed were fully operational, with another third operating below capacity. The top business constraint reported by surveyed firms was dampened demand, followed by uncertainty about the future and limited banking system functionality. Other difficulties surveyed firms face include a less efficient payment system, increased cost of doing business, poor availability of imported inputs, and difficulty securing loans. Female-owned firms are twice as likely to report a deterioration in security compared to male-owned firms.

Afghanistan's economy has a substantial trade deficit despite a surge in the value of exports. Import of certain goods nearly doubled during 2022 and 2023, whereas exports grew by only 3 percent in the first seven months of 2023. Unusually high imports in some categories led to a higher trade deficit. Despite a widening trade deficit, Afghani has appreciated in 2023. UN cash shipments and remittance inflows don't fully explain the deficit financing.

The off-budget international aid for humanitarian and basic services is declining. The economy, which seemed to have stabilized at a low equilibrium level by the end of 2022 compared to the decline immediate after the events of August 15, 2021, now appears vulnerable amid a mix of economic indicators. The financial system remains constricted; trade and other payments flowing into and out of Afghanistan are carried out to a large extent through informal channels. The banking system is vulnerable and under-capitalized, and private businesses cannot access needed financial services.

Last Updated: Oct 03, 2023

2,400
civil servants to be placed in key positions through the Capacity Building for Results project

Source
RELATED
Afghanistan Country Update April 2021
Afghanistan Country Update October 2020
Afghanistan Development Update July 2020
Afghanistan Results Profiles
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF)
Afghanistan Spatial Database
LENDING
Afghanistan: Commitments by Fiscal Year (in millions of dollars)*
460
338
784
0
0
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
200
400
600
800
1000
*Amounts include IBRD and IDA commitments
MULTIMEDIA
The World Bank
PAGETITLE_VIDEO
Afghan Villagers Stand in Solidarity to Fight Hunger
Afghan Villagers Stand in Solidarity to Fight Hunger
AROUND THE BANK GROUP
Find out what the Bank Group's branches are doing in Afghanistan.

IFC
MIGA
STAY CONNECTED
facebook logoFacebook
twitter logoTwitter
blogs logoEnd Poverty in South Asia Blog
flickr logoFlickr
youtube logoYouTube
rss logoRSS
newsletter logoSign up for email updates 
In Depth
AFG-ADUOct2022-003


tory Highlights:
Thousands of Afghans are enjoying better incomes and living conditions after the rehabilitation of two irrigation systems 10 years ago in Bamyan Province.
Upgrades under the Irrigation Restoration Development Project which addressed flooding and water shortage in the main canals, have resulted in better water management.
Changing climatic conditions are starting to impact farmers in the province where 90 percent of the population depends on agriculture.
BAMYAN CITY, Bamyan Province – A decade after the local irrigation systems were rehabilitated in two rural communities in Afghanistan's central Bamyan Province, residents continue to reap the benefits of improved water management, although changing climatic conditions are starting to have an impact.

In Foladi and Dokani villages in Bamyan city where the majority of residents depend on farming, ensuring the irrigation canals are in good working condition is a top concern, which was why the canals were upgraded in 2009 under the Irrigation Restoration Development Project (IRDP).

As the dry season comes to an end in Bamyan, the local shura, a council of elders, from Balkhi neighborhood in Foladi village walks along the canal inspecting its bed in preparation for the upcoming wet season. Taking advantage of the low water levels, the council notes places for repairs and clears away debris from the canal intake valves.

Aewaz, 77, a farmer from Foladi village, recalls the problems with flooding before the canal rehabilitation. “The river used to destroy our sand bags 3–4 times a year and flood our villages and crops,” he recounts. “We had a lot of problems before, but now that these intake valves have been installed, we don’t have a flood problem. After this project, the situation is better.”

The rehabilitation included lining the Balkhi canal bed and sides with concrete, installing metal gate valves at weak points prone to flooding, and adding small footbridges to address the most pressing problems.

Image
Farmers yielding their products in Balkhi and Dokani areas of Bamyan province where the rehabilitated irrigation canals have resulted in increasing farming productions and a better living condition for farmers. Photo credit: Rumi Consultancy / world Bank
Amin, 35, IRDP Bamyan provincial manager, points out that improving water management through infrastructure improvement has had long-term benefits for Bamyan Province, where 90 percent of the population depend on agriculture. “As the majority of Bamyan residents rely heavily on agriculture, projects like the rehabilitation of the Balkhi irrigation canal are extremely important. If we can improve water management, we can help rural farmers improve their livelihoods and raise their standard of living as a result.”

More than 600 households in the four villages— Foladi, Nawrozi, Qhazan, and Sia Khar Bloq—served by Balkhi canal have seen their economic and living conditions improve significantly. Says Qhulam, 79, a farmer from Foladi village: “I used to get 3,500 kg of potatoes from my land and with the better irrigation, I harvest 5,400 kg. My [monthly] income has increased by 2,000–2,700 afghanis ($26–$35)*. This project was the right decision for the people of our village.”

The Balkhi canal is one of over 180 irrigation schemes rehabilitated across the country by IRDP. Closed in December 2020, the IRDP was supporting the rehabilitation of irrigation systems serving some 284,000 hectares of land in targeted areas in Afghanistan. Over 425,000 households benefited from IRDP services, which aimed to improve access to irrigation in the targeted areas and strengthen capacity for water resources management at the National Water Affairs Regulation Authority (NAWARA). IRDP was implemented by the Ministry of Energy and Water and then by NAWARA through six regional offices: Kabul, Kandahar, Kunduz, Herat, Jalalabad, and Mazar-e-Sharif.

IRDP was funded by the government, the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF), managed by the World Bank on behalf of 34 donors, and the International Development Association (IDA), the World Bank Group’s fund for the poorest countries.  

"Our family’s income has doubled since the canal was rehabilitated…This project has been very beneficial for us. The canal is the life of this village. "
Sayeed Ali Razavi
farmer, Dolkani village, Bamyan Province
Image
The IRDP project supported by the Afghan government, ARTF and IDA  rehablitated 215 irrigation schems covering 284,391 hectares of agricultural lands across Afghanistan. 

Rumi Consultancy / World Bank

Switch to Higher-Earning Crops

About 14 km away from the Balkhi canal, the upgrading of the irrigation system in Dokani village has brought similar progress in income and living conditions, although it addressed an entirely different issue from Balkhi. “Before the canal was rehabilitated, our biggest problem was water shortage,” says Sayeed Qorban Ali Wafaie, 67, head of the Dokani Irrigation Association.

After the canal rehabilitated, farmers in Dokani were able to switch from growing low-earning baghali beans to cultivating potatoes and wheat because of better water management. “We cultivate potatoes now and they bring 3–4 times more revenue than baghali beans,” Wafaie says. “This was all possible because of the canal project.”

Like other farmers in the area, Sayeed Ali Razavi, 61, has seen his income rise after the irrigation system was upgraded. “Our family’s income has doubled since the canal was rehabilitated,” he says. “Previously, we harvested 560 kg of wheat. Now, we can harvest 1,120 kg of wheat and 10,500 kg of potatoes on 6,000 m2 of land. This project has been very beneficial for us. The canal is the life of this village.”

IRDP Bamyan provincial manager Amin Zaki says that more than 800 families have benefited from the 2009 Dokani rehabilitation project. He is, however, aware that more projects are needed for the future. “Changes in climate and recent droughts have resulted in grave consequences for water flow across Afghanistan and, especially, in Bamyan Province.” he says. “We need to take serious measures to invest in water [management] in Bamyan and Afghanistan.” IRDP has already begun procurement for two more water management projects in the Yakawlang district of Bamyan Province.

*All U.S. dollar equivalents are based on $1=75.75